The Project Gutenberg eBook of Color Images from Mars Rovers, by Bob Webster

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Color Images from Mars Rovers

Author: Bob Webster

Release Date: April 19, 2004 [eBook #12082]
[Most recently updated: January 7, 2023]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Bob Webster

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLOR IMAGES FROM MARS ROVERS ***




Color Images from Mars Rovers

by Bob Webster


Thanks to Bob Webster for making these images available. They are
recombinations of images with different colored filters. All images are
courtesy of NASA/JPL and in the public domain in the United States.

Mars Attacks!

I was browsing the NASA web site for photos from the Mars rovers, but
most of them are black and white. Then I noticed they have the raw
images posted that can be combined into color photos, so I combined a
bunch of them into "living color." Here they are:

 Mars in Color, from “Opportunity”
 Opportunity Photos
 Mars in Color, from “Spirit”
 Spirit Photos

The color is not perfect on these, but it should be in the
neighborhood. There are a lot of variables. The cameras are calibrated
differently from time to time, there are different bandwidths available
in different images, and the sun is at different angles.

In these photos, 3 to 6 images were taken, one after another, using
different bandwidth filters. There may be 5 minutes pass from the first
to the last image, so a shadow may move a little bit during that time.
An interesting effect of this is an occasional rainbow strip on the
edge of shadows.

The image file names include information such as camera type, time
taken, location, etc. Here is the full info:

http://origin.mars5.jpl.nasa.gov/gallery/edr_filename_key.html

The image on this site have the filter and sometimes the Left or Right
designator removed. If L or R is missing, then they were taken with the
Left camera, which uses visible light filters.

These images were taken with the panoramic camera, because it's the one
that uses color filters. The filters used vary from image to image. The
available filters are:

        Left Camera
        Right Camera

        1 = EMPTY (clear)
        1 = 436nm (37nm Short-pass)

        2 = 753nm (20nm bandpass)
        2 = 754nm (20nm bandpass)

        3 = 673nm (16nm bandpass)
        3 = 803nm (20nm bandpass)

        4 = 601nm (17nm bandpass)
        4 = 864nm (17nm bandpass)

        5 = 535nm (20nm bandpass)
        5 = 904nm (26nm bandpass)

        6 = 482nm (25nm bandpass)
        6 = 934nm (25nm bandpass)

        7 = 432nm (32nm Short-pass)
        7 = 1009nm (38nm Long-pass)

        8 = 440nm (20) Solar ND 5.0
        8 = 880nm (20) Solar ND 5.0

Some bandwidths of visible light are:

        red
        650

        orange
        590

        yellow
        570

        green
        510

        blue
        475

        indigo
        445

        violet
        400

Everything gets kind of fuzzy from this point on. The visible light
bandwidths are not even sharply delimited. The bandwidths in the
Martian cameras don't necessarily match the color bandwidths on
Earthling computers. In a lot of the images some of the bandwidths are
missing. For example, this image:

only uses filters 4, 5, and 7, which more or less correspond to
reddish-orange, yellow-green, and violet. There is a hole or two in the
spectrum, notably red and blue, so it ends up looking a little weird.
But it's still much better than black and white.

Some of the images from Mars use filters 2, 5, and 7, or some wide
range like that. This provides more information for scientific
analysis, but it doesn't look normal when combined. That is, if there
is a "normal" for pictures from Mars. I skipped most of these.

The right pan camera filters are mainly longer wavelength in the
ultraviolet range. I only included one of those pictures, mostly
because I wondered what it would look like:

I used Photo Mud to merge the separate images. In fact, I wrote the
Merge Color Separation function in Photo Mud so I could do this. You
can download a test version here:

http://xpda.com/photomudsetup.exe

When Photo Mud version 3.0 is released in a few days, I'll replace this
file with a 30-day trial version. If you download the test version
before then, you can have a free update to the release version without
a 30-day limit. Let me know if you find any "design considerations" or
other things that don't work.

Here's where to get the latest raw images from Mars:

http://origin.mars5.jpl.nasa.gov/gallery/all

Some of the NASA pictures show mainly red on Mars, such as this
panorama:

But the colors in the corners of this sundial in the base of the photo
from looks quite a bit different on earth than on the landscape photo.
There is a lack of blue in the Mars photo, or maybe even a translation
of blue to red. There's probably a good reason for this, since NASA has
better software and spent more time on it.

It looks to me like NASA included filter 2, infrared light, in their
red color composition. In this image with filter 2, you can see how
bright the lower right color tab is:

This one is filter 3, is visible red. The blue tab in the lower right
is not nearly as bright:

Here is a composition I did using infrared as red, and shifting the
colors toward that end of the spectrum. This is kind of like the
sundial in the color landscape.

Here's the image with "normal color" composition:

The second one looks a lot closer to the original photo above. In these
two images, the background dirt looks about the same, but these
settings make a big difference sometimes.

Photos Courtesy NASA/JPL-Caltech




Mars in Color, from “Opportunity”


4/9/2004

4/8/2004

4/7/2004

4/6/2004

4/5/2004

4/5/2004

4/4/2004

4/4/2004

4/4/2004

4/3/2004

3/30/2004

3/28/2004

3/28/2004

3/27/2004

3/24/2004

3/23/2004

3/22/2004

3/22/2004

3/21/2004

Infrared used for red
3/20/2004

filter 2 (infrared) used for red
3/20/2004

filter 2 (infrared) used for red
3/20/2004

3/20/2004

3/20/2004

3/20/2004

3/19/2004

3/18/2004

3/18/2004

3/17/2004

3/17/2004

Dubbed "Carousel," the rock in this image was the target of the Mars
Exploration Rover Opportunity science team's outcrop "scuff test." On
sol 51 (March 15, 2004), Opportunity slowly rotated its left front
wheel on the rock, abrading it in the same way that geology students
use a scratch test to determine the hardness of minerals. The image on
the right, taken by the rover's navigation camera on sol 51, shows the
rock post-scuff. In this image, it is apparent that Opportunity
scratched the surface of "Carousel" and deposited dirt that it was
carrying in its wheel rims.
3/16/2004

3/16/2004

3/15/2004

3/15/2004

"Shoemaker's Patio" near the Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity's
landing site, shows finely layered sediments, which have been
accentuated by erosion. The sphere-like grains or "blueberries"
distributed throughout the outcrop can be seen lining up with
individual layers. This observation indicates that the spherules are
geologic features called concretions, which form in pre-existing wet
sediments. Other sphere-like grains, such as impact spherules or
volcanic lapilli (fragments of material between 2 and 64 millimeters or
.08 and 2.5 inches in maximum dimension that are ejected from a
volcano) are thought to be deposited with sediments and thus would form
layers distinct from those of the rocks. This image was captured by the
rover's panoramic camera on the 50th martian day, or sol, of the
mission.
3/15/2004

3/14/2004

3/14/2004

This image is of the exceptional rock called "Berry Bowl" in the "Eagle
Crater" outcrop. The study of this "blueberry-strewn" area and the
identification of hematite as the major iron-bearing element within
these sphere-like grains helped scientists confirm their hypothesis
that the hematite in these martian spherules was deposited in water. To
separately analyze the mineralogical content of three main features
within this area -- blueberries, dust and rock -- it was important that
the rock abrasion tool's brush was able to rest on a relatively
berry-free spot. The rock's small size and crowd of berries made the
10-minute brushing a challenge to plan and execute. The successful
brushing on the target whimsically referred to as "Near Empty" on the
rover's 48th sol on Mars left a dust-free impression for subsequent
examination by the rover's spectrometers. No grinding was necessary on
the rock because spectral data obtained on the dust-free surface were
sufficient to verify that the rock's chemical composition differs
significantly from the hematite-rich berries.
3/13/2004

3/13/2004

3/12/2004

3/12/2004

The sphere-like grains or "blueberries" distributed throughout the
outcrop can be seen lining up with individual layers. This observation
indicates that the spherules are geologic features called concretions,
which form in pre-existing wet sediments. Other sphere-like grains,
such as impact spherules or volcanic lapilli (fragments of material
between 2 and 64 millimeters or .08 and 2.5 inches in maximum dimension
that are ejected from a volcano) are thought to be deposited with
sediments and thus would form layers distinct from those of the rocks.
3/11/2004

3/11/2004

3/11/2004

the 3.1 millimeter-deep (just over one-tenth of an inch) hole ground by
the Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity's rock abrasion tool in the
target called "Mojo 2" on "Flatrock" was taken on the 44th martian day,
or sol, of the mission. It will help complete the chemical analysis of
the lowest layer of the outcrop in the crater where the rover now
resides. After a brief brushing on sol 45, the science team plans to
place Opportunity's spectrometers on the hole to collect data vital to
their understanding of this impressive outcrop.
Scientists believe that the spherule or "blueberry" in the upper right
area of the circular impression was sliced in half by the rock abrasion
tool. "Blueberries" are a known obstruction to the grinding tool that
cause it to terminate its sequence. Despite the stall, the rock
abrasion tool abraded "Flatrock" for one hour and five minutes,
producing a cavity ripe for investigation.
3/10/2004

3/10/2004

3/9/2004

3/8/2004

3/7/2004

3/7/2004

This hole was made by the rover's rock abrasion tool, located on its
instrument deployment device, or "arm." The hole is located on a target
called "McKittrick" at the "El Capitan" region of the Meridiani Planum,
Mars, rock outcrop. It was made on the 30th martian day, or sol, of
Opportunity's journey.
The grinding process at has generated a significant amount of reddish
dust. Color and spectral properties of the dust show that it may
contain some fine-grained crystalline red hematite.
Courtesy NASA/JPL
3/1/2004

2/29/2004

This hole was made by the rover's rock abrasion tool, located on its
instrument deployment device, or "arm." The hole is located on a target
called "Guadalupe" at the "El Capitan" region of the Meridiani Planum,
Mars, rock outcrop. It was made on the 30th martian day, or sol, of
Opportunity's journey.
The grinding process at has generated a significant amount of reddish
dust. Color and spectral properties of the dust show that it may
contain some fine-grained crystalline red hematite.
2/29/2004

The silver colored metal of the ring on the solar abrasion tool is a
reddish brown after the dust settled on it, probably from fine-grained
hematite.
2/29/2004

2/28/2004

2/28/2004

2/27/2004

2/27/2004

2/22/2004

The image is from the right pan camera, made up of ultraviolet
bandwidths.
2/20/2004

2/20/2004

The "El Capitan" region of the rock outcrop at Meridiani Planum, Mars.
This image shows fine, parallel lamination in the upper area of the
rock, which also contains scattered sphere-shaped objects ranging from
1 to 2 millimeters (.04 to .08 inches) in size. There are also more
abundant, scattered vugs, or small cavities, that are shaped like
discs. These are about 1 centimeter (0.4 inches) long.
2/20/2004

2/20/2004

The "El Capitan" region of the rock outcrop at Meridiani Planum, Mars.
2/20/2004

The "capture magnet," which attracts atmospheric dust particles from
the front deck of the rover. The lighter-colored areas in the image are
clean sections of the magnet virtually free of dust, and the dark areas
are places where dust has collected. Dust particles in the martian
atmosphere are estimated to be about 1 micrometer in size (1/1000th of
a millimeter or 1/1000th of .04 inches).
The material below the magnet's aluminum surface is laid out in
concentric rings, giving the image a bull's-eye appearance. The magnet
was designed in this configuration to collect as much atmospheric dust
as possible. Spirit and Opportunity each carry seven magnets.
2/19/2004

The Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity dragged one of its wheels back
and forth across the sandy soil at Meridiani Planum to create a hole
(bottom left corner) approximately 50 centimeters (19.7 inches) long by
20 centimeters (7.9 inches) wide by 9 centimeters (3.5 inches) deep.
The rover's instrument deployment device, or arm, will begin studying
the fresh soil at the bottom of this trench later today for clues to
its mineral composition and history. Scientists chose this particular
site for digging because previous data taken by the rover's miniature
thermal emission spectrometer indicated that it contains crystalline
hematite, a mineral that sometimes forms in the presence of water. The
brightness of the newly-exposed soil is thought to be either intrinsic
to the soil itself, or a reflection of the Sun.
2/19/2004

The Mars Exploration Rover Opportunity dragged one of its wheels back
and forth across the sandy soil at Meridiani Planum to create a hole
(bottom left corner) approximately 50 centimeters (19.7 inches) long by
20 centimeters (7.9 inches) wide by 9 centimeters (3.5 inches) deep.
The rover's instrument deployment device, or arm, will begin studying
the fresh soil at the bottom of this trench later today for clues to
its mineral composition and history. Scientists chose this particular
site for digging because previous data taken by the rover's miniature
thermal emission spectrometer indicated that it contains crystalline
hematite, a mineral that sometimes forms in the presence of water. The
brightness of the newly-exposed soil is thought to be either intrinsic
to the soil itself, or a reflection of the Sun.
2/19/2004

2/17/2004

2/17/2004

2/14/2004

2/12/2004

2/9/2004

2/8/2004

Rock abrasion tool, also known as "rat" (circular device in center),
located on the rover's instrument deployment device, or "arm."
2/8/2004

2/7/2004

2/7/2004

2/7/2004

A region at the end of the rock outcrop lining the small crater, called
"Eagle Crater." The sphere-like grains or "blueberries" dotting the
rocks in the outcrop can also be seen above the rocks, suggesting that
these geologic features have origins beyond Eagle Crater.
2/7/2004

2/3/2004

1/28/2004

1/28/2004

1/28/2004

1/28/2004

1/28/2004

1/28/2004

1/28/2004

1/28/2004

1/28/2004

These layered rocks measure only 10 centimeters (4 inches) tall and are
thought to be either volcanic ash deposits or sediments carried by
water or wind.
1/27/2004

1/26/2004




Opportunity Photos




Mars in Color, from “Spirit”

4/11/2004

4/11/2004

4/11/2004

4/11/2004

4/11/2004

4/11/2004

4/11/2004

4/11/2004

4/7/2004

4/7/2004

4/7/2004

4/6/2004

4/5/2004

4/5/2004

4/5/2004

4/5/2004

4/5/2004

no violet/indigo
4/5/2004

4/5/2004

4/4/2004

4/4/2004

4/3/2004

4/3/2004

4/3/2004

4/1/2004

3/31/2004

3/30/2004

3/29/2004

3/29/2004

3/27/2004

This image was taken by NASA's Mars Exploration Rover Spirit on sol 79
after completing a two-location brushing on the rock dubbed "Mazatzal."
A coating of fine, dust-like material was successfully removed from
targets named "Illinois" (right) and "New York" (left), revealing clean
rock underneath. The center of the two brushed spots are approximately
10 centimeters (3.9 inches) apart and were aggressively analyzed by the
instruments on the robotic arm on sol 80. On sol 81, the rover drilled
into the New York target to expose the original rock underneath.
3/26/2004

3/25/2004

3/25/2004

3/25/2004

This hazard-avoidance camera image was taken by NASA's Mars Exploration
Rover Spirit on sol 79 after completing a two-location brushing on the
rock dubbed "Mazatzal." A coating of fine, dust-like material was
successfully removed from targets named "Illinois" (right) and "New
York" (left), revealing clean rock underneath. In this image, Spirit's
panoramic camera mast assembly, or camera head, can be seen shadowing
Mazatzal's surface. The center of the two brushed spots are
approximately 10 centimeters (3.9 inches) apart and were aggressively
analyzed by the instruments on the robotic arm on sol 80. On sol 81,
the rover drilled into the New York target to expose the original rock
underneath.
Note: The raw images are under the pan camera with color filters. ???
3/24/2004

NASA's Mars Exploration Rover Spirit took this panoramic camera image
of the rock target named "Mazatzal" on sol 77 (March 22, 2004). It is a
close-up look at the rock face and the targets that will be brushed and
ground by the rock abrasion tool in upcoming sols.
Mazatzal, like most rocks on Earth and Mars, has layers of material
near its surface that provide clues about the history of the rock.
Scientists believe that the top layer of Mazatzal is actually a coating
of dust and possibly even salts. Under this light coating may be a more
solid portion of the rock that has been chemically altered by
weathering. Past this layer is the unaltered rock, which may give
scientists the best information about how Mazatzal was formed.
Because each layer reveals information about the formation and
subsequent history of Mazatzal, it is important that scientists get a
look at each of them. For this reason, they have developed a multi-part
strategy to use the rock abrasion tool to systematically peel back
Mazatzal's layers and analyze what's underneath with the rover's
microscopic imager, and its Moessbauer and alpha particle X-ray
spectrometers.
The strategy began on sol 77 when scientists used the microscopic
imager to get a closer look at targets on Mazatzal named "New York,"
"Illinois" and "Arizona." These rock areas were targeted because they
posed the best opportunity for successfully using the rock abrasion
tool; Arizona also allowed for a close-up look at a range of tones. On
sol 78, Spirit's rock abrasion tool will do a light brushing on the
Illinois target to preserve some of the surface layers. Then, a
brushing of the New York target should remove the top coating of any
dust and salts and perhaps reveal the chemically altered rock
underneath. Finally, on sol 79, the rock abrasion tool will be
commanded to grind into the New York target, which will give scientists
the best chance of observing Mazatzal's interior.
The Mazatzal targets were named after the home states of some of the
rock abrasion tool and science team members.
3/23/2004

used violet for blue
3/22/2004

3/22/2004

3/22/2004

3/22/2004

3/22/2004

This image of the rock called "Mazatzal" was taken by the Mars
Exploration Rover Spirit. It reveals some interesting features on this
future rock abrasion tool target, including variants in tone, a sugary
surface texture and scalloped areas where parts of the rock seem to
have been worn away. Mazatzal's uniqueness is made even more obvious
when it is compared to the more typical, basaltic rock in the lower
right of the image.
3/21/2004

3/17/2004

3/17/2004

The Mars Exploration Rover Spirit acquired this navigation camera image
on the 72nd martian day, or sol, of its mission (March 15, 2004), after
digging its wheel into the drift dubbed "Serpent." Creating the
commands that would generate this "scar" was not an easy task for rover
controllers. Essentially, they had to choreograph an intricate dance
for Spirit, maneuvering it up the side of the dune, shimmying its left
front wheel a number of times to create the scuff, and then reversing
to attain proper positioning for miniature thermal emission
spectrometer observations. Before the task was finished, Spirit moved
forward to put the scuff within proper reach of the rover's arm.
This scar allows the rover's instruments to see below the drift
surface, to determine the composition of the materials. Initial results
indicate that the drift material is similar to the basaltic sands that
have been seen throughout Spirit's journey to the large crater dubbed
"Bonneville." The material does not seem to be the same as that inside
the crater.
Scientists are now looking to answer two questions: Why is the dark
sand in the crater not the same as the dark sand in the drift? And why
are there two different dark soil-type deposits in such a small place?
3/17/2004

3/17/2004

3/15/2004

3/15/2004

3/14/2004

3/14/2004

3/12/2004

3/11/2004

3/9/2004

3/9/2004

2/28/2004

2/27/2004

"Humphrey" at Gusev Crater, Mars, the Mars Exploration Rover Spirit's
landing site. Spirit examined the lumpy rock with its suite of
scientific instruments both before and after it drilled a hole into the
rock surface on the 60th martian day, or sol, of its mission.
"Humphrey" was one of several stops on the rover's way to the large
crater dubbed "Bonneville."
2/27/2004

2/27/2004

The large, shadowed rock in the foreground is nicknamed "Sandia" for a
mountain range in New Mexico. An imposing rock, "Sandia" is about 33
centimeters high and about 1.7 meters long. When lightened, this image
reveals much about the pictured rocks, which the science team believes
are ejected material, or ejecta, from the nearby crater called
"Bonneville." Scientists believe "Sandia" is a basaltic rock that
landed on its side after being ejected from the crater. The vertical
lines on the side of the rock facing the camera are known by geologists
as "flow banding" and typically run horizontally, indicating that
"Sandia" is on its side. What look like small holes on the two visible
sides of the rock are called vesicles; they were probably once gas
bubbles within the lava. Many smaller rocks can be seen in the
background of the image. Some rocks are completely exposed, while
others are only peeking out of the surface. Scientists believe that two
processes might be at work here: accretion, which occurs when winds
deposit material that slowly buries many of the rocks; and deflation,
which occurs when surface material is removed by wind, exposing more
and more of the rocks.

2/26/2004

2/18/2004

2/18/2004

2/17/2004

2/14/2004

2/14/2004

2/14/2004

2/14/2004

2/13/2004

2/13/2004

2/13/2004

2/13/2004

2/13/2004

2/13/2004

2/13/2004

2/13/2004

Magnetic dust collector
2/12/2004

2/10/2004

White Boat is the first rock target that Spirit drove to after
finishing a series of investigations on the rock Adirondack. White Boat
stood out to scientists due to its light color and more tabular shape
compared to the dark, rounded rocks that surround it.
2/9/2004

This is the Spirit's arm that does brushing, grinding, and drilling.
2/6/2004

This is the Spirit's arm that does brushing, grinding, and drilling.
2/2/2004




Spirit Photos




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLOR IMAGES FROM MARS ROVERS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


